---
title: "On Conversion"
date: 2022-03-10
draft: false
---

Contemporary culture, especially in India (where I live), looks at
religious conversion with deep apprehension --- sometimes justifiably
so. It immediately raises in the mind of the reader the spectre of
expansion of political power through economic incentives (aka bribes)
given to unsuspecting and usually uneducated populations by unscrupulous
individuals claiming to represent Christianity under the statutory cover
of *freedom of religious expression*. There is little doubt in my mind
that what I have described above (or specific variants thereof) belongs
in that large unholy pile of exploitative practices that human history
is unfortunately rife with and therefore worthy of condemnation and
censure.

The point of this post is not to debate the moral depravity of this
practice, but to consider whether this abuse somehow calls into question
the validity of religious conversion altogether.

## Conversion is not a bad word

Firstly, there is the idea of *conversion* itself. Bereft of its charged
contemporary cultural meaning, in the context of this post, I use the
word to refer to the idea of someone changing their mind about something
in the face of evidence that they find compelling. In this sense,
someone converting from a position of hostility towards the idea of
adding pineapple topping on pizza to one of enthusiastic endorsement
(presumably in the face of irrefutable evidence in favour of such
unnatural union) should be no more worthy of condemnation and censure as
someone converting from one religion to another.

Difference in opinion about pizza topping preferences, however, does not
evoke the kind of visceral response that religious conversion does. If
you would bear with some armchair sociological analysis, I would
speculate that this response must have something to do with how religion
often is more a deeply held social identity marker that human beings use
to belong to a community (and conversely, to identify those that do not)
than a well-reasoned and thought through position on the nature of
reality. So, someone converting to a different religion is perceived as
a betrayal of one's allegiance to one's community. And in eastern
honour/shame cultures, such betrayal is seen as an act that brings deep
shame to one's immediate family which then results in a loss of standing
in the community.

It is unfortunate that religion as a world view and religion as a social
identity marker are so joined at the hip in this manner. An honest
pursuit of truth demands that at any given point in time one ought to be
willing to amend or even upend one's set of beliefs when faced with
evidence that necessitates such emendation. I would argue in fact that
such willingness and ability is a sign of good intellectual and
psychological health.

## Everybody converts

Further, I propose that in any civil discourse, none of us can help but
seek to convert. Human social interaction is largely a sequence of
conversion attempts between individuals and groups. Some do it well,
leading to fulfilling thriving relationships and others do it less well,
leading to conflict and wars. Even the person who is unilaterally
opposed to the idea of religious conversion is, in the process of
espousing their position, attempting to convert their interlocutors to
their position.

The idea of changing minds is morally neutral. Every proposition must
stand, or fall based on the merits of the argument being made in its
defence. It is indeed arguable that all progress is critically
contingent on the ability of a people group to freely traffic in ideas
in a civil manner. What matters therefore is not whether conversion in
and of itself is morally permissible or not (because it is morally
neutral) or whether one ought to engage in conversion attempts or not
(because we cannot help but engage in it) but whether the truth
proposition being made is coherent and consistent with reality.

## Epistemology of abuse?

Epistemology is concerned with *how* we know that a proposition is true.
Is it true that historically Christian proselytization has been used as
a cudgel to win and consolidate political power? Yes. Does the fact of
such abuse automatically invalidate the Christian proposition?
Regardless of the merits of the specific arguments themselves I want to
propose here that its abuse has little relevance to its truth or
falsehood. In other words, no truth proposition should be accepted or
rejected based on whether or how it has been abused. This sort of
epistemology of abuse, it must be self-evident, leads to all kinds of
absurdities.

We would be hard pressed to find a single prevalent (or defunct, for
that matter) world view, which has not at some point been a victim of
abuse. Christianity, Islam, Hinduism, Judaism and so on, including even
secular naturalistic world views have been and are being used as
instruments of oppression designed to gain or consolidate political and
other forms of power. This in and of itself does not make those world
views false. Nor, importantly, does it justify the abolishing of the
propounding of those world views in the marketplace of ideas. Instead,
an appropriate response would be to fight and abolish the abuse and
oppression.

### Meagre moral fruits?

As a professing Christian, do I not find the fact of the amenability of
the Christian proposition to abuse troubling? I do. Does it, however,
discredit the whole Christian project? As it happens, taken as a whole,
Christian doctrine predicts that such abuse would occur. In other words,
the presence of the abuse of Christianity is internally coherent with
the truth claims that it makes. Take for instance the following verse
from the prophet Jeremiah (17:9) in the Bible.

> The heart is deceitful above all things, and desperately sick; who can
> understand it?

And again, in Ecclesiastes 9:3.

> ...the hearts of the children of man are full of evil, and madness is
> in their hearts while they live...

It is not a surprise that Christian doctrine is appropriated by some for
serving ends that do not agree with the very doctrines that they purport
to espouse. Indeed, that and more is to be expected given the Biblical
diagnosis that the human heart is naturally inclined to folly.

## Why proselytize at all?

The question of why Christians bother with proselytization at all is
perhaps the most contentious of all concerns. Could we not leave people
be with the beliefs that they choose to hold? Why must the Christian
evangelise? Are we all not entitled to our own beliefs? Isn't it narrow
minded to insist that Christianity has access to exclusive truths that
are somehow unavailable to others?

### On human flourishing

The ideal rational actor is always expected to hold views that aid human
flourishing rather than hamper it. In this rarefied hypothetical space
constituted exclusively of rational actors, all disagreement must be
about the nature of the views in question as to its ability to achieve
this goal (i.e., human flourishing). In other words, reasonable people
can disagree about what leads to human flourishing but to act
consistently with one's beliefs should not be somehow a surprising
outcome.

Christianity adopts a particular view as to what leads to a thriving
abundant life in the context of both life as it persists presently and
also in the age to come. If we were to simply grant that the Christian
view is not in error, then certain conclusions naturally follow (note
that I am not making a defence below for the truth of Christian claims
but only pointing out the necessary out workings that follow from taking
those claims seriously).

-   Given the exclusive nature of the Christian claim[^1] it necessarily
    follows that other views must be wrong. This is no more a
    *narrow-minded* perspective than claiming that affirming that being
    sufficiently hydrated is a necessary condition for the physical
    flourishing of human beings is a *narrow-minded* view. The claim is
    either true or false, but it is not narrow.

-   Given the Christian imperative to love one's neighbour as oneself,
    it also necessarily follows that inviting others into Christian
    fellowship is an expression of love. Indeed, if Christianity is true
    then evangelism is the highest form of expression of brotherly love
    and to fail to do so is to essentially hate one's neighbour.

-   At the heart of Christianity is Jesus, the Messiah foretold in
    Jewish scriptures. If Christianity is true (including the
    proposition that the gospel narratives provide a reliable account of
    Jesus' life) then one must take Jesus' claims seriously including
    His great commission to go forth and make disciples (not *converts*)
    of all nations[^2].

Christian evangelism therefore is consistent with the specific claim it
makes with respect to what leads to human flourishing. The question to
ask is not why the Christian evangelises but to challenge the truth
claims that Christianity makes.

### Coercion

Every individual is free to hold any belief that they desire. The role
of the evangelist stops at merely communicating the gospel. That
coercion in this context is both pointless and morally repugnant should
be self-evident but is worth reaffirming.

## Conclusion

Human beings seem to be prone to over-reacting to situations --- to
respond to one extreme by over-correcting to a different extreme. It
takes a concerted effort of will in order to resist that instinct and
come up with a measured and appropriate response. Faced with the reality
of abuse of exercise of religious freedom in evangelising one's beliefs,
the over-correction is to abolish evangelism entirely. A measured
response would be to work towards abolishing the abuse of exercise of
religious freedom and to protect the vulnerable. Ideas ought to stand or
fall as a function of the merit of the arguments offered in its defence.
Shutting down all discourse of a specific kind only sets the precedent
for similar excesses in the future where those who are in power, or a
social majority is able to determine what everyone is allowed to think
and say.

[^1]: As one finds in the New Testament in the book of Acts, chapter 4
    and verse 12 where Peter, speaking of Jesus, under divine
    inspiration, remarks, "*And there is salvation in no one else, for
    there is no other name under heaven given among men by which we must
    be saved.*".

[^2]: "Go therefore and make disciples of all nations, baptizing them in
    the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit..." --
    Matthew 28:19
