---
title: "On Implicitness"
date: 2021-06-11T15:39:13+05:30
draft: true
---

I would like to clarify what I meant when I spoke of implicit meanings latent in
propositions. I can see how this can potentially be misconstrued as insinuation
of some underlying sinister motivation that I am, in my narrowmindedness,
attempting to foist. That is not at all what I was hinting at. In other words, I
was not suggesting that Krishnamurti has some nefarious motive that is somehow
"implicit" in his proposition.

I rather intended to use the word "implicit" in the sense that when propositions
are made, inferences naturally follow. If I said for instance, that I walked to
the store, there is nothing nefarious or sinister in then inferring that
implicit in that declaration is the understanding that I did not drive or run or
bicycle to the store. I did not explicitly state all the modes of transport I
did not use but commiting to one of the modes makes it philosophically (i.e.,
logically) necessary that we discount all other modes.

I was trying to point out that his proposition, if taken seriously, seems to
undermine itself. I find this kind of self-negation a common feature of
propositions that make absolute claims. Krishnamurti's claim, as I understand
it, is that belonging to any kind of social category is an expression of
violence because (ironically) implicit in such declaration is the idea that they
are separating themselves from people who do not belong to that category. In
making this claim, it is clear that Krishnamurti himself is drawing up at least
2 categories - one comprising of people who subscribe to his view and another
comprising of people who do not. It therefore follows that given that this is
his proposition he must necessarily subscribe to it which means that he
separates himself from people who are not in his camp thereby undermining his
appeal to non-violence.

In other words, it seems to me that it is impossible to pass judgement on social
stratification without simultaneously participating in it. My view is that
social categories themselves are not the problem. For example, having categories
such as "pro murder" and "pro life" is not problematic. What would be
problematic is claiming membership in the "pro murder" camp.

J Krishnamurti is a sophisticated philosopher himself, so chances are, he has
some response to this objection.